Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. Today I'm joined by Doctor John Hibbing. He's
the Foundation Regents University Professor of Political Science and
Psychology at the University of Nebraska Lincoln. And today
we're talking about his book Predisposed, the Left, the
Right, and the Biology of Political Differences. So, Doctor
Hibbing, welcome to the show. It's a huge pleasure
to have you on.
Thank you, Ricardo. I'm delighted to be here.
So, uh, we, I, I, I need to ask
you about the left and the right, but before
we get into the science itself, what is, what
is the most common view people have of political
differences? Where do people think they stem from?
Well, um, uh, I've taught political science for a
lot of years, and I frequently ask my students
that. Where do you think your political views came
from? And it probably won't surprise you that the
most common answer is my parents that, uh, the
kind of socialization I received as a child, uh,
was very influential to me. Sometimes you'll hear that
the media, uh, was relevant, but, uh, yeah, usually
people believe that their parents have provided the basis
for their political beliefs.
Uh, BUT is there any truth to that or
not? Well, not really, um, you know, uh, in
fact, if you look at the evidence, it suggests
that parental socialization is actually fairly weak, uh, certainly
not irrelevant, um, but it's not nearly as strong
as you might imagine, especially on individual issues, uh,
you know, when you break it down to a
specific issue rather than a more global orientation to
the left or right, uh, then you see that
that, uh. Uh, CHILDREN are really quite dissimilar to
their, to their parents. So I think we, we
tend to maybe attribute a little bit more influence
to parents than they actually have.
And when it comes to the left right divide,
how do you operationalize left and right when it
comes to understanding the psychology behind people who fall
more on one end of the spectrum than the
other?
Right. Yeah, that's an easy thing to be confused
about and that my hunches will probably talk more
about this as the the session goes on, but
to get us started, um, I really think the
core differences between the left and the right have
to do with your attitude toward new things, uh,
maybe different people, maybe, uh, people coming in from
outside the country, uh, how tolerant you are of
people who break the rules, how open you are
to new ideas, uh, as opposed to being very
devoted to tradition. And protection and the way we've
always done things so that's, uh, you know, obviously
the, the former is more of the left, the
latter is more the right those I think are
the, the core things. I think maybe some of
the confusion on this issue comes when people try
to bring in too many things I talk about,
um, corruption or infrastructure or even the tax code,
uh, we, we kind of blend that into the
left and right and. You know, sometimes that's certainly
true, but I think the core differences between the
left and the right where we really need to
focus on those issues about orientation to others in
groups, out groups, uh, tradition as opposed to new
ideas.
And would you expect to find these differences between
left and right or even these two constructs, let's
say across at least all industrialized societies or yeah
uh that's, you know, I think when you operationalize
it the way I did, uh, and don't focus
on a specific issue like abortion or the tax
code, uh, then I do think you can expect
to see, I think we do see, um, the
these differences between the left and the right, um,
pretty much the world over, not just even in
industrialized countries but. Um, YOU know, some of the
anthropologists have gone back and looked at hunter gatherer
societies, and they do tend to see, uh, a
clear difference between individuals who are very wedded to
the way we've always done things and those who
are open to new ideas and new groups, uh,
maybe, uh, uh, an immigrant coming from the tribe
over the hill.
So let me just ask you right away a
question that I think many people would be interested
in, interested in knowing the answer to. So why
is it that so many times we react so
negatively to others, we espouse different political views, and
why does it seem, does it seem that many
times it's so hard for us to have political
conversations with someone holding opposing orientations?
Yeah, yeah, that's and you're absolutely right that's a
core question. um, YOU know, for me, maybe this
isn't surprising since I'm a political scientist, but I
see politics as kind of at the core of
human existence we're very social creatures and politics, when
you think about it, is really how to structure
social life, how, how should our social unit look?
How should we be oriented to other social units?
How should we, you know, treat people who break
the rules and things like that so. Um, I
think, I think that's really something we need to
sort out, you know, we, we're not the fastest
runners on the planet, we're not the strongest, we
don't have the sharpest claws, the best vision, but
we are very good about organizing social units, so
I think this is, this is something that cuts
very close to the bone for us where we
feel very strongly about it. So if you have
a different view of how to structure a social
unit than I do. Uh, THAT can get me
very upset and I, I, I think that maybe
that's gonna damage our social unit. That's not the
way we should run things. So I think at
that level it, it becomes very important to us
and it makes it very easy for us to
feel extremely strongly about political issues.
But do you think that perhaps there are particular
circumstances like for example, economic and political instability that
lead to an, to an even bigger difficulty in
conversing with people from the other side of the
spectrum. I'm asking you that because particularly at the
present moment, more or less worldwide, it seems that
we are going through a very big polarization, right?
Yeah, and you know, yeah, I, I would guess,
I would say. That part of the reason for
that is I think a lot of the issues
that we are debating do involve these core issues
of identity in groups and out groups um you
know we got a lot of of uh movement
of peoples around the world today, um, uh, from
the south to the north and otherwise so I
think when those are the key issues that's when
we really do get uh a danger of of
there being blood on the streets if you will,
politically, uh, I think if we argued about infrastructure
or whether the government should be centered. In the,
the nation's capital or in the regions, you know,
those are issues we can deal with a little
bit more easily, but when the issues are, uh,
immigration, defense, protection, uh, in groups and out groups,
then I think uh the, the feelings get uh
overly intense.
And when it comes to differences in political orientation,
are they different in nature from, for example, differences
in tastes in art, humor, food, and so on?
Uh, YEAH, let me maybe answer that with two
different threads, um. On the one hand, I, you
know, I think these tastes in food and art
and humor, uh, and tastes in politics, uh, they
can kind of all go together, um, we, uh,
back to this notion of how you're oriented toward
new things or old things, um, you know, it
might not surprise you to learn that people who
are conservative politically, people who are on the right.
Uh, TEND to like art that is very traditional,
uh, and realistic, whereas, uh, people on the left
are more open to art that is, uh, avant-garde
or, uh, abstract, um, so I think we need
to view politics as part of this larger package
of who we are psychologically, um, socially, and like
a taste in food and art and humor and
whatever it might be. So in that sense they're
part of the package. However, uh, I do think,
uh, the, the kind of thrust of your question
is probably right in that there's something different about
politics. Um, YOU know, it's, it's one thing if
you like abstract art and I like realism in
art. That's fine. That doesn't really impinge me. I
don't have to watch the art that you do,
but with politics we're making policies for an entire
social unit for a country if you will, and
so therefore your views become very relevant. They could
impinge upon me in a way that they don't
impinge upon me, you know, if you like meat
and I don't you know that that that's fine,
but when we make politics for the unit and
these these global policies, then I think it becomes
more contentious.
And when it comes to uh the basis of
our political preferences, let's say, do you think that
they have an evolutionary basis to them? And if
so, what would have led to the evolution of
these differences?
Right, yes, um, uh, I do think that I,
I am not an evolutionary psychologist, but I do
think looking to evolution for insights is a very
useful thing. And I think in this case, um,
back to my comments about Social units being essential
to who we are as humans, that's that's been
something that's that's uh crucial to us for a
long long time really probably since before we were
humans so we had to make decisions about how
the social unit should be structured so I think
we've we've been debating these issues for a long
long time um and I think that's why politics
is uh is central and I think if you
view it in those kinds of terms it's helpful
to understand what what kinds of things did we
need to decide about the social unit. Um, WAY
back when, and it's surprising how similar they are
today. And my hunches, uh, we'll, we'll talk about
a few of these as the sessions go on.
Mhm.
So at the sort of point in your book,
you talk about 5 bedrock social dilemmas that distinguish
the left from the right. I think that you've
already mentioned some of these, but they include degree
of adherence to traditional values slash moral codes. The
second one treatment of our group slash rule. Breakers
number 3, the role of group slash individual number
4, authority and leadership and number 5, redistribution and
egalitarianism. Would you like to perhaps tell us a
little bit about these social dilemmas or why is
it these 5 that you think are the most
important here?
Well, yeah, I, I, you know, I'm sure there
are others that we could bring in but it
seemed to me those are 5 good illustrations of
the kinds of things that we needed to decide
as uh as social creatures, um, um, we needed
to think about things like how is our social
unit gonna be led, uh, are we going to
have a leader or are we gonna have a
very decentralized kind of thing. Uh, WHAT should we
do about punishing people who break the rules? Should
they be, uh, ostracized from the group, thrown out,
banished, uh, put to death, uh, put in stocks,
you know, we have lots of options, or should
we just say, you know, you're a naughty person,
don't do that again, um, what about the, the
tribe over the hill? How should we orient ourselves
to, to, uh, outsiders? Should we welcome them? It's
it's kind of interesting. A lot of anthropologists these
days are coming around to the idea that even
in hunter gatherer societies there was always a little
bit more migration from one group to the other,
uh, than we might have thought. So, um, you
know, some individuals might say that's a good thing,
uh, it provides variety, new ideas, um. Diversity of
the gene pool even uh others might say, oh
my God, you know that that we can't have
these people who are not like us as a
threat to the way we've always done things, um,
so those kinds of things are very important. Um,
HOW to distribute resources, you know, if, if you're
a hunter and come home with, with a kill,
do you get to keep it or should that
be distributed across the village? Uh, IT seemed just
to us like those are some pretty essential things
that any group would need to decide, and that's
why we refer to them as bedrock dilemmas, things
that that really do need to be sorted through.
And there are people who differ on that. There's,
you know, people on one side of authority, they
want a strong leader and other people say no,
that leader might get too powerful and abuse us
and be more dangerous than why we had the
leader to protect us in the first place.
But since we're talking here mostly about predispositions, namely
psychological predispositions, where, what is a predisposition exactly? What
does it mean to say that someone is predisposed
to a particular kind of behavior toward particular kinds
of preferences and things like that?
I guess to me that just means that we
have tendencies inside us that exist prior to any
given situation so you know maybe you are somebody
who uh is suspicious of out groups and immigrants
and therefore a situation arises and then boom your
predisposition kind of kicks into gear very readily that's
not to say there might be something that could
change your views. Um, BUT it, it probably takes
a lot to change those views, whereas your predisposition
leads you in a certain direction, um, uh, more
readily than if you weren't predisposed that way. So
yeah, I guess my answer would be some kind
of tendency that exists before a particular situation arises
that would be a predisposition.
Right. So there are political scientists and political psychologists
who approach uh political differences starting from personal personality
traits and trying to understand if particular sets of
personality traits predispose people to being more on the
left or on the right. Is there a link
there really between personality and political views?
I think there is, um, uh, without going into
this too deeply, you probably know that uh psychologists
tend to organize personality around five traits, uh, openness
to new experiences, conscientiousness, extroversion, agreeableness, and neuroticism. So
those are the, the five famous ones, and, uh,
there've been a lot of studies that have tried
to see if that correlates with political views or
people on the left this way or that way.
Really on most of the, the personality traits we
don't find much of a relationship, especially on neuroticism,
agreeableness, and extroversion, you know, uh uh a liberalist,
uh, people person on the left is as likely
to be an extrovert or a neuroticism, a neuroticist
as uh somebody on the right, um, we do
see a lot more difference though with regard to
the trait of openness, uh, and I think that
fits with some of the things we were talking
about just a minute ago. Being open to new
experiences, not surprisingly people on the left tend to
be a little bit more open to new experiences
so there's been a fairly strong correlation there um
in a variety of countries it's not just in
in developed countries but around the world we tend
to see that some people have found a slight
relationship with conscientiousness that people on the right are
a little bit more conscientious that one's not nearly
as strong and and it may be a little
bit more debated. Um, SO I guess my, sorry
for the, the long answer, but the short of
it would be that yes, uh, especially on the
trait of openness, we do see a correlation between
personality traits and politics.
But in this particular case, the correlation between personality
traits and political views, would it be a causal
relationship that is, would people who have certain particular
kinds of uh psychological personality traits be predisposed or,
or that would cause them to prefer uh views
from the right side or the left, the left
side of the political aisle or?
Yes, great question and um not surprisingly that's a
very difficult one to study. People have tried to
tease that out, which comes first politics or personality,
um, and I don't think we've got a satisfactory
answer to that. uh, I guess I'm a little
bit less concerned with which comes first and uh
to me. Um, THEY'RE all kind of part of
this big ball of wax which is who we
are, um, so you've got your, your political orientation,
your personality orientation, your taste in food and art
like we talked about before, uh, I think that's
just part of who we are and then that
kind of branches off into these different areas of
life including politics. So, um, uh, I hope that
doesn't sound like a cop out but I think
maybe we don't need to, to identify exactly what
comes first to me. Being open to new experiences
that that's kind of it's a personality trait but
it's also something that is almost political if you
believe in politics as this organization of social life
as I do.
So that's about personality traits, but then we also
have moral foundations theory developed by people like Jonathan
Haidt and others. What do you make of it?
Do you think that there's something to that kind
of research linking certain moral foundations with uh with
the political orientations?
I do, yeah, uh, just as was the case
with personality, I think, I think, uh, moral foundations
is very helpful to think about kind of what,
what moral preferences and, and issues tend to drive
you more than others. So, again, without going into
too much detail, you probably know that uh height
specifies five moral foundations harm avoidance, um, justice slash
equality. And there's authority and in-group outgroup and uh
loyalty, loyalty authority in-group outgroup, yeah,
so and also purity I
think purity, that's right, yeah, thank you. You're right,
yeah, um. So the issues like purity and loyalty
authority and in group out group, um, those tend
to show up a little bit more on the
right side of the political spectrum as I think
this fits with what we've been talking about, whereas
people on the left tend to be a little
bit more concerned with with harm avoidance and um
equality or or or justice so I think there's
a relationship there, um. My colleagues and I have
done some analysis of the extent to which moral
foundations are heritable, and there we were a little
bit surprised to find that that they're not as
heritable as some of the political straight up political
views so in that sense I I think maybe
there might be something a little bit more foundational
about political orientation and moral foundations but um you
know I'm a big fan of the work of
Jonathan Haidt and I think uh I think uh
thinking about moral foundations is certainly useful and very
relevant to politics.
And one of the things associated with moral foundations
is that at a certain point height and these
collaborators added 6th moral foundation that is liberty, and
they connected it to people who identify as being
libertarian. Do you think that the kind of approach
that you present in your book would also account
for people across other dimensions, like, for example, or
across other spectrums, like, for example, the authoritarian libertarian
spectrum or is it just for the left right
divide?
Yeah, um. You know, I think libertarians are very
interesting and and uh. I'm not sure we can
place them clearly on the left or the right,
um, you know, that this desire for liberty right
now in the United States we're having a political
campaign, you know, and, and the candidate on the
left, Kamala Harris is very supportive of reproductive rights,
so she talks a lot about liberty. We don't
want the government telling us how to run our
lives, what decisions to make with regard to reproduction,
um, so that sounds libertarian, but then of course
many things that Donald Trump on the right. Uh,
SAYS, uh, echo these libertarian tendencies about, you know,
the right to bear arms and, and things like
that. So I think, um. I think libertarianism and
authority is not quite as as much cutting to
the core of these issues as the in group
out group kinds of things are and that that's
something we can talk about but certainly uh others
would disagree with me on that but uh I
think it's it's relevant but I don't think it's
really at the center of things. I think a
lot of people. You know, they, they want liberty
or authority, depending on what the issues are that
are being advocated. So, um, and that says to
me that it's those issues that are really at
the core rather than how we get there.
Mhm. Yeah, that's a great point. So, uh, but
now a question that is even more basic, let's
say, in terms of the science, the neuroscience and
the cognitive science, particularly, are there also differences in
perception between the left and the right?
Um, HOW do you mean that, that, that, uh,
people on the left, the people on the right
see the world differently? Yes, OK, yeah, um, yeah,
there are, um, there are all kinds of differences
so that we've found in, uh, kind of how
people look at the world and what they see
when they look out at the world. Um, THERE'S
one study we've done where we show uh a
computer screen filled with lots of faces, and these
faces are all of the same person with the
same expression. Except one, and then that's the same
person, but he or she has either a happy
or an angry expression. They call that an an
oddball uh figure because all the rest are the
same. So then we just ask people when this
comes on the screen, uh, how, you know, press
the space bar as soon as you spot that
face that's different than the others. Um, SO, uh,
and it's kind of interesting, uh, uh, people who
are on the political right tend to be faster
when that expression is angry. People on the left
tend to be faster to hit the space bar
when it's a happy face. So that to me
says that there are these kinds of differences in,
in kind of, uh, people's sensitivities to different aspects
of the world. uh, SO I think when people
look out at the world they see very different
things. Um, YOU know, maybe you're highly attuned to
angry faces because you're a little bit worried about,
uh, about being threatened by another human being who's
a bad guy with a gun or something like
that, or maybe you're, you just like happy people,
um, and, and therefore you're oriented to that. So
I do think there is, uh, there are these
differences, and I think we have been able to
identify them with, with a variety of political studies.
Mhm. So one particular difference that you talk about
in your book has to do with how people
respond to potential threats. So, uh what is the
difference there in that domain between people on the
left and people on the right?
Yeah, here I think um the book actually just
came out in a 2nd edition and uh it's,
it's very similar to the 1st, except on this
issue, I think we've shifted a little bit. Um,
I think in the first edition we were maybe
too broad and we said, well, conservatives tend to
be a little bit more uh prone to be
threatened and therefore they want protection, they want a
strong military, uh, strong police, strong defense, um, in
the United States, the right to bear arms, uh,
so you know whatever it is it's going to
protect us, they, they tend to like, um. In
the second edition I think we focused a little
bit more specifically and appropriately on threats from other
human beings. I don't think it's the case that
people on the political right are just more worried
about any kind of threat. Uh, WE saw that
I think with regard to COVID. Uh, I don't
know about Portugal, but you know it's actually the
case in the United States that people on the
right were a little bit more cavalier uh, they
didn't want all these steps to be taken to
mitigate the the danger of COVID so I think
the way people react to, you know, a germ,
uh, as opposed to. Uh, A, a criminal, uh,
are very different things, and I think it's the
throughout evolutionary history it was mostly the criminals that
we worried about. There wasn't anything that our hunter
gatherer ancestors really could do about, um, a germ.
They just, it happened, um, uh, but we could
take precautions against uh a threat. Uh, BY another
human being, so I think that's been the danger
throughout our evolutionary past and therefore I think that's
where we really see a difference, and I do
think people on the right tend to be more
concerned about the threat posed by other human beings,
especially other human beings who are different than uh
than the in group.
Do we know if there are differences in the
brains of people on the left and the right?
And if so, I mean, if we find the
difference at the level of the brain, what does
that tell us? What kind of implications does it
have?
Yeah, there have been, um, a few studies on
this, 4 or 5, my colleagues and I did
one, maybe I'll start with that one, this was
led by a, a really good neuroscientist named Reed
Montague and, uh, one of the things we found
was that people on the right and left differ,
um. Sorry, let me back up a step. So,
uh, you have people in a, a, a brain
scan, uh, they call it FMRI because they're gonna
be doing something in the brain scan. In our
case, they're gonna be looking at an image and
we just wanted to see what was going on
in the brain when people would see these images.
Um, MOST of the images we used were of,
uh, bodies that had been damaged, mutilation if you
will. Some of them were fairly disgusting and others
were just, um, you know, someone had been, been
cut. Um, AND we wanted to see what was
going on in the brain, and one of the
things we found there's a part of the brain
called somatosensory 2, and it's very active when you
get, uh, hurt. So if, if, uh, I would
punch you in the nose right now, um, your
somatosensory too would go up because you'd be injured.
Um, HOWEVER, it also tends to be active when
you see someone else get hurt. So if you
would see a videotape of someone stepping on a
nail or something that really was, was obviously painful,
then your somatosensory too is, is very active. Well,
it was kind of interesting to us that we
found that um when we would show these images
of, of mutilated bodies. Um, PEOPLE on the left
had a very active somatosensory too, so, uh, you
know, presumably this was a kind of empathic reaction.
So they're saying, oh my gosh, that person was
just injured. I feel sorry for them. People on
the right had more activation in a part of
the brain called the anterior cingulate cortex, the ACC,
which tends to be involved in just identifying that
something was wrong, something's amiss, um, I didn't expect
that. Uh, KIND of thing, what should we do
about it? So it was not exactly empathy but
just, uh, I don't know how to deal with
this, with this injured body. So, um, maybe that's
too much detail, but I thought the interesting thing
was that we could actually make a pretty strong
prediction, pretty accurate prediction of whether people were on
the left or the right politically simply on the
basis of their neural activation patterns when viewing a
mutilated body. Um, SO, um, that's just one example
of the kinds of, of, uh, brain imaging work
that has been done, uh, politically, uh, another famous
one, that was not done by us, uh, found
some differences in the amygdala, which is part of
the brain, as you probably know, very active in,
in, uh, threatening situations or fear or anger, uh,
negative social situations, especially, um, and, uh, the other
tended to be more activation on the part of
people on the political right. Uh, THEN the left,
um. What else? Yes, uh, actually there was one
study that that found some structural differences. What I've
been referring to at this point are more what
happens in a particular situation, but, um, another well
known study found, found some basic differences in the
way that the brains looked even if they weren't
doing anything. So these are all, you know, uh,
brain imaging studies tend to be small and there
aren't a lot of cases it's difficult study to
do. So there's certainly room for challenging some of
those results and maybe future studies will find something
different, but as of now, there is some indication
that, yeah, with regard to a few organs of
the brain, there might be some differences between people
on the left and people on the right.
So one particular psychological trait that people talk a
lot about in recent times in regards to political
differences and where they stem from has to do
with this guest sensitivity. So is there a difference
between the left and the right there? And if
so, uh, disgust sensitivity would connect, uh, in what
ways to politics?
Yeah, um. Yeah, there's been a lot of work
done on this and uh especially by Paul Bloom
and others who found. That people with greater disgust
sensitivity, and this is usually ascertained with a survey.
So I would ask you questions like, uh, you
know, would you sleep in a bed where a
person had died the night before, even if the
sheets had been washed, um, would you eat a
bowl of soup that had been stirred with a
clean flyswatter, um, you know, just a whole bunch
of questions like that, and then we, we take
your responses to maybe a couple of dozen questions
along those lines and, and we can say, well,
yeah, Ricardo tends to be a little bit more
sensitive to disgusting things than somebody else. Um, AND
then we find out your political beliefs and we
see if there's a correlation and it does tend
to be the case that people who, who register
greater disgust sensitivity tend to be a little bit
more toward the right, especially on some issues, uh,
uh, issues with regard to, uh, sex, uh, sexual
preferences and, and, uh, behaviors, uh, if you have
high disgust sensitivity, then you're, uh, more likely to
be opposed to gay marriage and and things like
that. Um, SOME people have found it with a
broader array of political views, not just those pertaining
to, to sex, but, uh, others have, have not
been so sure. Um, WE'VE done a study, which
was a little bit of a variation on that,
you know, um, We think surveys are really useful,
but at the end of the day, they're what
we call self-reports because you're just saying, here's what
I think of that candidate, here's how I think
I'm gonna vote. Here's where I think my views
came from. Well, the truth of the matter is
sometimes humans aren't very good at reflecting on their
own psychological state, uh, so we might not know,
um, how we respond or we might not know,
um, where these things came from. So what we
tried to do was we had people hooked up
to um a psycho uh physiological uh measurement device
uh that would measure skin conductance and then we'd
show them disgusting images so rather than just say.
Uh, ARE you disgusted by this situation? We'd have
you look at an image. Of, um, maybe, um,
you know, poop on, on the floor, uh, and
then we'd say we wouldn't say anything we just
look at at how you responded to that with
your skin conductance went up, um, and we tended
to find the same thing that people on the
political right tended to be have a little bit
greater disgust sensitivity response in this case, not a
survey response but an actual physiological response, um, so
I think that that fits in a way. Um,
ALTHOUGH I, I have to be, uh, truth in
advertising here, someone else, uh, repeated that study and
did not find the results nearly as strong, so,
you know, maybe we need to, uh, to, uh,
have a question mark by, by that, but at
least there there's some evidence that discuss gust sensitivity
is a little bit greater on the part of
people on the political right.
Isn't there a link between these guest sensitivity and
the moral foundation of sanctity slash purity? At least
I remember, I vaguely remember that being referenced in
Jonathan Haidt's Heid's book, uh, The Righteous Mind. Yes,
no,
you're absolutely right. I think that makes sense, doesn't
it, that Discuss sensitivity and purity, um, you know,
people who have a strong sense of purity also
have a strong sense of disgust sensitivity because they
to them purity is very important and we see
these impure things and they're gonna react negatively to
that. So yes, you're absolutely right, good point.
Uh, AND I, I mean, of course, one of
the ways for us to study differences across individuals
uh is to do behavior genetic studies by studying
uh twins, reared apart and we're together and also
adoptive. So, what do we know from those types
of studies about the potential genetic differences between people
on the left and people on the right?
Yes, an important question. So, uh, there have been
a lot of studies of this. We've done many
ourselves, um, uh, twins are very useful in this
situation because they're two different types of twins, as
you probably know, uh, monozygotic twins, which are sometimes
called identical twins and dizygotic, which are, are fraternal
twins, so really no more genetically similar than a,
a regular pair of siblings. So the question then
becomes are monozygotic twins who've been reared in the
same family, presumably have the same kinds of of
influences, uh, more similar politically than dizygotic twins also
reared in the same family, um, so you'd expect
a fairly similar, you know, environmental influences, um, and
the results, uh, always show that there is a
greater similarity with MZ twins, so, um, that can
generate the conclusion then that yes there is a
genetic aspect to politics. I always like to add
though, people, there's something about genetics that encourages people
to get carried away, I think so and, and
as soon as you mention genetics I say oh
my God, then, uh, you know, everything must come
from from genes. It's clearly not the case. um
um I just saw one recent uh meta-analysis where
they're, you know, combining lots of different studies of
behavioral genetics. With twins and uh they estimate I
forget the exact number, but it was about uh
uh 0.3 out of 1.0 so in other words,
maybe uh 30% of our variation in political views
could be derived from genetics, um, but of course
if 30% come from genetics that leaves 70% to
come from the environment so I just wanted to
make sure that you know your listeners don't think
I'm claiming something I'm not uh, the environment is
still crucial. Um, I guess what. When we first
started doing this research though, a lot of political
scientists were not very happy, uh, we're, we're surprised,
we're dubious, um, and, um, you know, because they
tend to believe that 100% of our political beliefs
come from the environment. And um you know I
just think because they think politics is so special,
so uniquely human, uh, that we we only learn
it from our parents, from the media, from a
clergy person, from whatever from our teachers and professors,
um, so that that tends to be the common
view and our view is that certainly we're not
denigrating the importance of the environment, but we do
think that behavioral genetics research shows fairly clearly that
uh genes do have some role even if it's
a role that's not quite as strong as the
environment.
But since you mentioned the environment there, what kinds
of environmental factors have been studied in terms of
the ones that would have an effect in how
people develop their political views?
Yeah, I think it's it's the usuals, um, you
know, the, the parents and, and, uh. Uh, YOUR
peers are, are clearly very important to those kinds
of things. What kinds of experiences you've had. Did
you grow up in a comfortable neighborhood or a
threatening one? Uh, I hope this is not too
far off track, but I, um, My colleagues and
I had a project that we were very excited
about, um, and that was to uh engage in
a study called, um. Uh, DISCORDANT monozygotic twins. And
what that means is, uh, yes, most monozygotic twins
are similar politically, um. But that doesn't mean they
all are and so what we wanted to do
was find those those instances in which a pair
of so-called identical twins who've been reared in the
same environment with the same parents, etc. uh, HAD
different political views. We thought it would be very
useful to really bore in and try to find
out exactly what, you know, what was different in
their experiences. um, UNFORTUNATELY, even though the reviewers really
liked that study, we, we didn't get the money
to do it. Um, SO you know that that
always pained me because I thought I, I would
be in a position to give a much better
answer to your question if we could have had
a study like that because it, it controls for
the environment in a way and, and also the
genetics and then to see what might have been
important but you know, presumably things can happen in
the world and, and these can affect your political
beliefs maybe you. You, uh, witnessed a robbery, uh,
at a crucial age and that really affected you
and it led you to want to have a
strong police force or maybe you saw an immigrant
suffering and that affected you so you know, clearly
these kinds of things can matter obviously today we've
got the media and social media that have tremendous
influence on things, um, although I do like to
point out that, you know, um, if you are
one of those individuals who loves to watch conservative
or or right wing. Uh, SOCIAL outlets or media
outlets, uh, it may be that you had that
predisposition before, um, you know, in the United States
we talked a lot about Fox News. I'm sure
you've heard about this, and, uh, but I think
a lot of the people who tend to watch
Fox News, uh, tended to have this predisposition before
they started watching and then they get reinforced, um,
there's no doubt about that, it's important, but I'm
not sure it's the initial cause of those things.
I think for that we might need to look
back at some things like genetics.
Right. And another very interesting thing about how people
react to, for example, this behavior genetic studies is
that apparently there are differences in who accepts biological
differences or predispositions between individuals when it comes to
explaining how they differ in terms of their political
orientations, right? I mean, there are some people who
accept it more than others.
Yeah, no, that's, that's true, um, and I, I
also think that's changed over time. Uh, WHEN I
first started talking about these these ideas maybe 20
years ago, at least in my classroom students were
very suspicious and reluctant to believe that, you know,
the notion that genetics could be involved in politics,
I just struck them as really odd, um. And
but you know, recently in my classrooms, uh, and
even some of the talks I've given to non-students,
there's a little bit more acceptance. I don't know
if it's because of 23andMe and you know people
have just found out that, uh, genetics are relevant
to personality and, and, uh, you know, some of
the, uh, uh, disabilities that that we talk about,
but there's a a more ready ready acceptance I
think these days, but you're right, still not everybody
and uh these. Uh, I know from experience that
these kinds of studies can, can generate some very
strong feelings. Some people just don't like the idea,
um, that maybe genetics have to do with our
politics. They want us to be able to control
everything, um, so yeah, I, I'm not sure how
it breaks down. We've, we've got a lot of
criticism both from the right and the left, um.
You know, it used to be that people on
the right would say well these are just some
academics who are on the left and they're trying
to make conservatives, people on the right look bad
or look like they're genetically flawed or something like
that but then also people on the left, you
know, uh, frequently would say things like, well, no,
uh, you know we think people are malleable we
can, we can adjust them and and help them
and fix them we just need a government program,
uh, to do that and it doesn't really have
anything to do with genetics so. Uh, AT times
we felt kind of beleaguered because we would, we
would get, uh, criticized both from the left, uh,
and the right, uh, but I do think, uh,
as Nick Jagger said, time is on our side,
uh, I think as the years go on, uh,
we do see a little bit more support for
this notion that that genetics are involved as long
as we can keep them in perspective, help people
realize, I think you know the old kind of
Mendelian view of genetics was that there's just one
gene. That affects you know whether your pee is
purple or white or whether you're um you know
um politics are left or right um so if
we can help people understand that that's not how
genetics works and there are incredible number of genes
that all interact with the environment and then you've
got epigenetics which we're not even talking about um
you know all these things go in so I
think the more people understand the richness of genetics.
The easier it is for them to understand that
politics, like almost every other aspect of life, could
in fact be influenced in part by genetics.
By the way, do we, do you have any
idea if when it comes to, uh, accepting biological
differences, there's also a difference between people on the
left and the right, because, uh, sometimes, uh, or
some people tend to have this sort of stereotype
where they think that people on the right would
more easily. Accept that there's biological differences in explaining
certain kinds of psychological traits and people on the
left would tend to favor more environmental factors, is
that right or not?
Yeah, it's a little bit of a complicated situation.
We have done a study on this and it's
true if you just give people the choice between
the environment and genetics. Then, uh, people on the
right tend to side a little bit more on
genetics and people on the left with the environment,
you know, that somebody's a criminal just because they
eat too many candy bars or, you know, something
like that, that, that tends to be the response
on the left. What's interesting though is if you
have three possibilities. The environment, genetics and free will,
then guess what? uh THE right is very supportive
of free will and it's actually the left that
is more supportive of the genetics argument, um, so,
uh. I think that's kind of interesting and um.
There's a, a couple of scholars recently, Robert Sapolsky
and uh and others have um made the case
that really people on the left should be much
more supportive of the genetic argument. Um, THEY talk
about the genetic lottery and if you think about
it, so, you know, all of us were given
a certain batch of genes when we were born.
Some of us lucked out a little bit more
than others. Maybe it helped us, uh, to jump
higher or or play sports better, uh, kick a
football, um, or do well academically and, uh, make
good decisions, um, so you know, if, if you
have that view that it's really nothing that you
should feel so proud of you just happen to
get a good batch of genes from your parents.
Then we need to be more thoughtful and more
helpful and more respectful of people who maybe were
not as fortunate in the so-called genetic lottery. So,
uh, that I think is an interesting view that
seems to be taking root a little bit that
really people on the left should embrace the role
of genetics because it, it fits in with this
notion that we need to be much more compassionate
to people who are, are downtrodden.
Yes, because I mean, even, even if we have
a certain degree of free will, it's not the
case that we can choose all of our traits,
right? We always have these predispositions that pull us
uh uh in one direction or the other, right?
Exactly, that's very well said. Mhm.
So, going back to one of my early questions
when I asked you about why people tend to
get into these heated discussions whenever there's political disagreement,
do you, what do you think that we can
do with this information, the information that you present
in your book? Is it, do you think it's
possible to tackle political issues like political disputes, things
like polarization, or not?
Well yeah, I, I think my answer will probably
be a little bit unsatisfying uh I wish I
could say yes if if you just embrace these
ideas then you know political conflict and polarization will
go away but uh that's not the case. I,
I do think that maybe, um, embracing these ideas
that the fact that politics runs very deep, um,
could help us be a little bit less frustrated,
you know, um. If we recognize that, that maybe
the reason this individual is on the far political
right has more to do with um some kind
of deeper feelings, perhaps genetics, some experiences that individual
had, uh, and by the way, you know, Sometimes
what we study is called biopolitics and I think
it's important to note that that can come not
just from genetics but actually your environmental experiences can
be so rich that maybe that causes some environmental
changes or some physiological changes so you know we
can be shaped by our genes but also the
environment shapes our biology uh as well. Um, SO
where was I going with that? What was your
question, Ricardo?
Uh, MY question was, uh, if we can use
the information you present in your book to tackle,
right, yeah, thank you. Sorry about that. So, um,
you know, I think, um. We need to be
less frustrated with those people who differ from us
in the United States right now in our campaign
for the presidency, um, we hear a lot of
talk about how down deep people are really all
the same and that's that's a very appealing notion
and I guess one of the things I would
like to say is it's simply not true. I,
I, I wish it were but in my opinion
down deep we're very, very different we have different.
Neural structures, we have different genetics, we have different
psychological tendencies, moral foundations, personalities, and these things, uh,
kind of push us to the left or to
the right. So they're very different. So the notion
that these people who differ with us simply have
Have listened to the wrong media outlet and if
we could just talk to them for a little
bit we could get them all straight we could
we could sort this out that's not true it's
you're gonna be banging your head against the wall
and it's gonna be very frustrating to you and
you're gonna think they're stupid or they're they're ignoring
valid information. And maybe they are, but you know,
one of the reasons they are is that they're
wired up that way. They see and experience the
world in a very different way than you do.
So I guess, um, I don't know if it
would help or not, but I think it would
be a more realistic approach for us to give
up on this notion that somehow we're all the
same, you know, I guess at one level we
are, we're human beings, but we have very different
structures with regard to how social life should run
and how we are built and I think recognizing
that could. Um, COULD help us, uh, it could
maybe encourage us to focus more on a lot
of the people who are not wired up one
way or the other, and that's something we haven't
talked a whole lot about yet, but just because
we're talking a lot about the left and the
right doesn't mean everybody can be categorized into those
two things. There are a lot of people in
the middle. Um, YOU know, in the studies we
do, we, we array people from far left to
far right, and, and then we see if there
are correlations with these, you know, tendencies how people
use the eye track or what they look at
on a screen or or their neural structures or
their physiological responses. So, so we do recognize that
there are people in the middle and I guess
I think what needs to happen is you can
identify those individuals who are not firmly embedded one
way or the other. And those are the individuals
you need to focus on because they're malleable they're
they're in play, so to speak we can we
can persuade them and if you want to win
an election, I think that's where you need to
go. The notion that we can you know go
clear over to the other side and persuade them,
I think is probably a fool's errand. It's simply
not gonna happen. They're just, they believe in that
too strongly.
But these people in the middle that you're referring
to there, what do you call them? Are they
the centrists?
Um, YEAH, uh, in the middle of the centrist
is fine. Um, YOU know, I think we need
to be a little careful. Uh, IT'S probably not
as big a group as we might. Imagine people
love to say they're in the center. That's a
very popular thing, and I don't wanna upset anybody
uh by saying I know more and you're not
really in the center, but, uh, a lot of
times in, in, uh, political science research if you
drill down a little bit you'll find out that
people who say they're in the center do tend
to tilt pretty strongly one way or the other,
either to the left or the right so you
have to get by. Whether they are just saying
that, um. Or, or whether they really believe it
and if you can identify those who are really
in the center, then I think yes they're, they're
the ones you need to talk to because they're
they're, they have an open mind, uh, and they
don't have these strong, uh strong predispositions. I guess
one final point on on that I think that's
another illustration of why we shouldn't rely just on
surveys because if you do ask people are you
in the center or the left or the right,
they'll say in the center and then, uh, but
we know that deep down they're not really there
so I think that opens up the door for
some of these more biological psychological approaches that we're
kind of advocating in our research agenda.
A very interesting thing that you focused on earlier
and we haven't talked much about yet has to
do with physiological responses. So when it comes to
differences between the left and the right, what kinds
of uh behaviors, preferences or attitudes and so on
can we study physiologically?
Right, well, I guess we talked a little bit
about disgust sensitivity, how, how that could do you
could show people disgusting images and see how they
respond. Um, ONE of the things we've done, uh,
besides that is, uh, startle response. So this is
where you just, uh, sit people, uh, you know,
comfortably, uh, in front of a computer and they're
not looking at anything on the screen, uh, and
then all of a sudden they'll be a startle,
there'll be a sudden noise. Um, AND, uh, we've
got it set up so that we can see,
uh, we have sensors on their, uh, around their
eyes, so we know, uh, you know, when that
happens if somebody would come right up to your
eyes and say boo, you tend to blink, you,
you, you startled, um, but we can measure how
hard people blink if if they come down really
hard or if it's just a casual kind of
blink. Um, THAT'S called startle response. And, uh, again,
just one study, uh, that needs to be replicated,
but there is some indication that people on the
right do tend to have a somewhat stronger startle
response. The the muscles around their eyes contract a
little bit more powerfully, uh, than people who aren't.
And then you can always, uh, you know, put
people in certain contexts and do the same kinds
of things. For example, um. If you're watching a
really scary movie and you're uh annoying little brother
or something comes up behind you and says boo,
uh, and it's in the dark, then you're probably
going to startle a lot more than if you're
watching a romantic comedy, uh, in the daylight. So
you know these contexts are really important and, um,
that's, uh, one of the things that I think
we can look at and see when people have,
uh, these, these strong startle responses and are they
particularly sensitive to the context that exists. So yeah,
skin conductance, uh, seeing how whether you, um, your
sweat glands open up, that's a very common way
of measuring, um, a physiological response. Starle blink, uh,
is, is another one. You can look at the
muscles, uh, not just around the eyes but in
other parts of the face to see what they're
doing, uh, the neuroimaging that we talked about earlier
in this, uh, podcast is, uh, you know, another
way to look at some of the physiological things
that are going on.
Uh, BUT, uh, physiologically, what differences do you see?
Could you give, uh, could you give a specific
examples of physiological differences that you see between people
on the left and the right?
Yeah, well, I mentioned with regard to startle blink
that that people on the right tend to have
a somewhat stronger, uh, startle blink response, um, as
far as uh skin conductance is concerned, uh, here
again, one study found a fairly small study that
uh people on the right tend to have a
stronger uh physiological response to, uh, negative things, uh,
threatening situation. I wish uh we could go back
and do that again with what we talked about
before, the more uh um specific threatening situations that
involve other human beings, not just a spider, um,
for example, but uh uh uh a person who
maybe doesn't look like you're in group, uh, with
a weapon. Uh, IN a gang, something like that,
you know, I think that's where we'd really find
these things. So, um, you know, I think that
there's some indication that people on the right have
a stronger physiological response to all negative things. I
think that's, that's not holding up real well in
replications and I think if we did focus on
those particular kinds of negative things we've talked about
today, uh, especially with regard to threats from outsiders,
I think that we get a real big difference
between the left and the right.
So I have one final question then earlier you
mentioned biopolitics. So in this field, what would you
say in your opinion are some of the still
unanswered questions that you would like to see answered
in the near future?
Yeah. Well, there there's so many that that's, uh,
I guess, uh, I've kind of started on this
road a little bit that, um. I think, uh,
Our research tended to focus a little bit too
broadly on negativity, and we thought that that uh
people on the political right had a more a
stronger reaction to negative things and people on the
left did. Uh, WHAT I'd really like to see
the, the field, the direction I'd like to see
the field go in is more along the lines
of of particular negative things that involve in groups
and out groups because the more I think about
it, the more I I think this is at
the core. Uh, AGAIN, I hope this isn't too
much of a digression, but one time, uh, I
was doing, uh, a lecture series in, uh, Denmark,
and, um, several talks, and, uh, after one I
remember that uh some people pulled me aside, you
know, Danes are very polite so they didn't want
to, uh, challenge me in front of the whole
group, but afterwards they said, look, this left right
idea is just wrong. There there is no clear
left and right. They said for example in Denmark.
All the even the parties on the right are
very supportive of a strong social welfare system, you
know, with national health care, uh, and things like
that so there's really not a left and the
right, um, so but for once I was able
to think fairly quickly on my feet and I
said, look, uh, I, I, I know a little
bit about Danish politics and I know that's true,
but tell me, is it the case that the
parties on the right also want to extend the
social safety net to recent immigrants? And then they
said, well, no, of course not, you know, parties
are right they don't want the immigrants to be
uh um able to, to draw on the social
welfare systems and I said well now you're talking,
you know, this to me is getting close to
the core of the difference between the left and
the right, um, you know how we distribute things.
It's not nearly as important in this larger political
orientation sense then who's getting those benefits, you know,
if you see those benefits going to people who
you think don't deserve them, ne'er do wells and
people who have come from other countries who haven't
been paying taxes and things like that, you know,
now you're starting to get at the differences between
the left and the right, um, so I that's
again, maybe we should have talked about this earlier
when you asked about the left and right, but
I think we have to be careful. There are
a lot of issues that don't load on the
left and right nearly as clearly. Uh, BUT I
think this issue of sensitivity to to out groups
and and in groups, um, really does so to
bring that back to your pertinent question is I,
I, I wish the discipline of biopolitic would focus
a little bit more on these differences between, uh,
tradition and new ideas, uh, punishing and letting them
off with a slap on the wrist, uh, immigrants,
uh, as opposed to, to natives who've been in
this country a long time to me that's, that's
really what's at the core and. That's why politics
is so contentious these days because we're talking about
issues that have a very deep evolutionary um hold
on the human condition, uh, in a way that
some of these issues, other issues simply don't.
Great. So the book is again predisposed, the left,
right, and the biology of political differences. I'm leaving
a link to it in the description of the
interview. And Doctor Hibbing, just before we go, apart
from the book, would you like to tell people
where they can find you and your work on
the internet?
Sure, um, you know, my, um, uh, my email
address is jibbing@unl.edu. Um, UNL stands for University of
Nebraska Lincoln, uh, so, uh, yeah, and just, uh,
all lowercase jibbing uh at UNL.edu. That's probably the
best. I don't have a fancy web page or
anything like that, so, uh, yeah, I'm always, uh,
eager to hear from people whether they think these
ideas are crazy or. Uh, PARTICULAR experiences they've had,
uh, you know, part of my interest in this
comes because I have a brother who's very much
on the political right, uh, and I'm not so
much, so I'm curious, you know, what, where this
comes from, uh, and it's, it's led me, uh,
uh, because he's still my brother. I still love
him, so I wanna, wanna understand why we have
these things that sometimes make it difficult for us
to get along. So, uh, in that sense I'm
always interested in other people's kinds of experiences with
this, uh, and hopefully we can all get together
and figure out a way that maybe we can
get along a little bit better.
Great. So thank you so much again for taking
the time to come on the show. It's been
a fascinating conversation.
Thank you, Ricardo. Thanks for the, the very insightful
questions.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Pergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyche Olaf,
Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
Matri Robert Windegaruyasi Zu Mark Nes calling in Holbrookfield
governor Michael Stormir Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnseroro and
Hal Herzognun Macha Jonathan Labrant John Jasent and the
Samuel Corriere, Heinz, Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus
Fran David Sloan Wilson, Asila dearraujoro and Roach Diego
Londono Correa. Yannick Punteran Rosmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhn
Pavlostaevskynalebaa medicine, Gary Galman Samov Zaledrianei Poltonin John Barboza,
Julian Price, Edward Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franca
Bartolotti Gabrielon Scorteus Slelisky, Scott Zachary Fish Tim Duffyani
Smith John Wieman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau,
Luke Lovai Giorgio Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Vozin, David
Williams, the Augusta, Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw,
Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee
Junior, Old Heringbo. Sterry Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert
Gray, Zigoren, Jeff McMann, Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark
Campbell, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Storry, Kimberly Johnson,
Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael
Bensleyman. George Eoriatis, Valentin Steinman, Perkrolis, Kate van Goller,
Alexander Aubert, Liam Dunaway, BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular
John Nertner, Ursula Gudinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff Sean
Nelson, Mike Levine, and Jos Net. A special thanks
to my producers. These are Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas
Steffinik, Tom Venneden, Bernard Curtis Dixon, Benedic Muller, Thomas
Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, Gian Carlo Montenegroal Ni
Cortiz and Nick Golden, and to my executive producers,
Matthew Levender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank
you for all.